Hello again!
In this video, we are going to talk about execution policies. Execution policies are applied to standard
algorithms.
These algorithms were introduced in C++98.
They are a set of functions which can be called on containers and sequences of data.
These algorithms implement classic computer science techniques such as searching, sorting, populating
containers, copying elements from one container to another, reordering the elements and so on.
Most of these algorithms are in the  header.
Although just to catch you out, they put a few
in the  header.
Usually when you call an algorithm, you give it an iterator range,
which corresponds to the
sequence of elements you want the algorithm to be applied to.
You can also pass an optional extra argument, which is a callable object, and that function
will be applied to the elements in the sequence.
When an algorithm executes, it, performs a series of operations on the elements of the container.
It may modify them, swap them around, compare them, pass them as arguments to a function call
and so
on.
When algorithms came in in 1998, most computers only provided one way of executing code, but now
we have four to choose from.
The first one is sequential, in which we have a single instruction which processes a single data item.
And this is the traditional C++ model.
For example, if you write a loop, it will process the first element, then it will process the second element
then it will process the third and so on.
All the elements are looked at in turn.
There is also vectorized execution.
This is when a single instruction processes several data items at the same time.
For example, it is
possible to have a processor instruction that can add four integers in a single operation.
This requires support from the hardware.
It also requires that the data structure is suitable for vectorized processing.
So if you have an array or vector, that would be ideal.
If you have a map or multimap, maybe not.
There is also parallel execution in which several instructions each possess a single data item at the
same time.
For example, instead of having one processor adding 16 numbers in sequence, we could have
eight processors which add up eight pairs of numbers.
This requires a suitable algorithm. An example of this would be a sorting algorithm where you split
the data into two halves and sort each half, then split each part of that into two parts and so on.
All these parts are sorted independently.
So they could be sorted on separate processors at the same time.
And then finally, you can really "go wild" and do both at the same time, so you can have parallel and
vectorized execution.
So you can have multiple processors, each of which is executing instructions which will process multiple
items of data in a single instruction.
And this will only work if you have the right algorithm, the right data structure and the right hardware.
C++17 added execution policies, and these allow us to say how we want an algorithm to be executed.
The choices all match the hardware that I just described.
The sequential means do not use any kind of parallel execution or vectorization.
So just sequential, the "good old-fashioned" way of executing things. par for using parallel execution.
par underscore unseq for using parallel and vectorized execution.
And then in C++20, they added the fourth possibility, unseq for using vectorized execution.
It is important to realize these are only requests.
It is a bit like the "inline" keyword. It could be ignored.
For example, if the hardware does not support parallel or vectorized execution,
then the compiler
will not generate those instructions.
If there are not enough system resources available to do it efficiently.
For example, if the system cannot create any more threads, then you may be forced to run in a single
thread.
And also, if the C++ library you are using has not implemented the parallel or the vectorized version,
and there are quite a few gaps at the moment.
To actually specify a policy, we need to include the  header,
which defines all these policy
objects, and then we pass the appropriate object as the first document of the algorithm call.
So the traditional call is just to pass the iterator range.
So sort(v.begin(), v.end()) would give non-policy execution.
Then if we have seq as the first argument, that will give us sequential execution. par for parallel,
par_unseq to request parallel and vectorized execution.
And in C++20, we will be able to pass unseq as well.
So let's look at these in more detail.
With sequenced policy execution, all the operations in the algorithm execution are going to be performed
on a single thread and this will be the thread which calls the algorithm function.
The operations will not be interleaved, but they may not necessarily be executed in a specific order.
So here is some code in which we actually use the execution policies.
We are going to start off with
a traditional algorithm call, actually. We are going to use for_each(). This will take a range of iterators.
And then the third argument is a callable object.
And this will be called on every element in the range.
We have a vector with 2,000 elements, and in effect, we are going to populate the vector with values
from one up to 2,000.
So there we are, the final value is 2000.
So we have not had any data corruption, and all the numbers appear to be in order.
(I am not going to check all of them!)
So we have included the  header, we are also using the execution namespace under std, and then if
we seq as the first argument, then we are requesting a sequential execution.
So let's try that.
So, again, the last element is 2,000.
There has not been any data corruption. The elements could be in a different order, but they look
as though they are [in order].
So when we use the sequential execution policy, the elements will always have the right values, but
they may not necessarily be in the right order.
It's a bit of a "Eric Morecambe".
If you have ever seen the Morecambe and Wise sketch with Andre Previn or "Andrew Preview", as they call him. If you
have no idea what I am talking about, just ignore it.
It is British humour.
When we ask for parallel execution, the executions are performed in parallel across a number of threads,
and this could include the thread that called the algorithm function. Within those operations, any
given operation is going to be run on the same thread for its entire duration.
So we are not going to get operations which are switched from one thread to another or from one processor
to another. Operations which are performed on the same thread will not be interleaved, but may not
necessarily be executed in a particular order.
And of course, we have operations on different threads.
So this means there is a possibility of data races.
So let's go back to our program and change this to par.
We may not actually get a data race, but let's
give it a try.
Oh, right.
We did get one.
So the last element is 1752.
So there has been some corruption.
We are using this variable count.
It is being incremented in each operation, but these operations are being performed on different threads.
So it could be that different threads are seeing different values of count.
If we make that atomic, then it should work.
Okay...
Yes, there we are. The last value is 2,000. By the way, I should have mentioned, when you compile
this code make sure that your compiler is in C++17 mode.
So, for example, with Visual Studio, that is the project properties. And then Configuration, General
and then C++ language standards.
If you are using other compilers, it will be different, obviously.
But if you do not do that, it probably will not compile.
And then unsequenced execution. The operations are performed on a single thread, which will be the one
which called the algorithm.
So this is vectorization. Operations will not be interleaved, but may not necessarily be executed in
a particular order.
This time, we do not have to worry about data races, but we do have to worry about shared state. If there is
any interaction between elements or between threads, then that could cause a data race.
In particular, if we allocate or deallocate memory, that could cause a problem, and also mutexes, locks
and other forms of synchronization.
This is not actually supported in C++17. I do not think my compiler has C++20 support yet.
(It has a preview)
No, still no good.
Okay, maybe by the time that you watch this video that will work. I am planning actually to do another
concurrency course which goes into more depth and covers C++20.
But let's see how this one goes first.
And then finally, parallel, unsynchronized execution.
We have executions which are performed in parallel across a number of threads. Again, possibly including
the thread that called the algorithm.
And this time an operation can be migrated from one thread to another.
Operations which are performed on the same thread, may be interleaved and may not necessarily be executed
in a specific order.
And then the requirements are a combination of both.
We must avoid data races and we must also avoid modifying shared state.
So if we change that to par_unseq (and let's also make that a normal variable again)
So, again, we get the data race, so we have 1,982 instead of 2,000.
(So let's quickly make that atomic again before anyone notices!)
There we are, that is better.
So we go up to 2,000. And you will notice actually that the values are not necessarily in order.
So we have 1898, 1981, 1889, 1892, 1824, 1897.
OK, so that's it for this video.
I'll see you next time, but meanwhile, keep coding!